Hello friends
In this video let us discuss about the need for
binary search tree
So we have learned about array data structures
It was simple but was it efficient Say this array
here
If you want to search for the Element 80 we
have to start from the first node and then visit
every element and compare the key to find it so
it will take order of n time
Same for insertion and deletion if we need to delete
80 we need to traverse the whole array to find
80 first and then deleted so it will take order of
n time
Also array is static
It cannot grow or shrink on demand so that is
also a problem so it is not very efficient for
the size issue
It can be sold using a linked list
It can grow or shrink on demand
If we need to access the Element 50 we have
to traverse the whole linked list so
Still the cost of operation is the same order of
n so these issues can be addressed by binary search
trees in be BSTs
The value of left child will be less than the
value of parent and the value of parent will be
less than the value of right child so we can
easily find the minimum element in BST
It will be the left most node and similarly the
maximum element will be the right most node in this
way
For every sub tree we can easily find the minimum
and maximum elements
Also duplicate elements are not normally allowed in binary search
trees
Now let us construct binary search tree with these
elements
So first insert 100 it becomes the root
Now as features discussed all the values which are greater
than root  will be in its right sub tree and
all the values which are smaller than root  will be
in the left sub tree
now let us insert 50 50 is less than hundreds so
it will become hundreds left child
Next we have 200 since 200 is greater than hundreds
it will become hundreds right child
Next we have 10 ten is less than hundreds so it
should be placed in left sub tree and we have
50 here and 10 is less than 50 also so
again ten will be placed as fifties left child
Next we have 60 60 less than 100 so it
should be in the left sub tree
And there we have 50 and 60 is greater than
50 so 60 becomes the right child of 50
Next we have 150 150 is greater than 100
So it should be placed in the right sub tree
And in here we have 200 150 is less than
So 150 becomes the left child of 200
Next we have 300 since 300 is greater than 100 and 200
300 will be placed as the right child of
Next we have 500 500 is greater than 100 greater
than 200 greater and 300 so it becomes the right
child of 300
So that is how we can insert nodes to binary
search tree and see the minimum value
10 is the left most node and the maximum value
500 is the right Most node
Now let us discuss about searching and deleting and node
from BST
For example let's find the elements 60 so first compares
60 with roots data and 60 is less than hundreds
So we can understand that since sixties less than 100
it can only be present in the left sub tree
so we can ignore the right sub tree
Now compare the key 60 with left child's data and
we got key greater than data here that is sixties
greater than 50
So 60 can only be present in fifties
right sub tree so we can ignore it's left sub
tree and we goto 60
Here
now let us find 150 150 is greater than hundreds
so we can ignore the left sub tree and compare
150 with the right child
200 and one fifty's less than 200 so it can
only be present in the left sub tree
So ignore the right sub tree and compare 150
with left childs data and regard it equal
So the key is found
so like This
If we have n nodes the total searchable size will be
reduced n by two then n by four then n
by eight and at the end it will boil down
to a single element that is n by to raise to
0 n by to raise to 1 n by to raise
to 2 n by 2 raise to 3 up to one
that is in general n by to raise to k
k equal to 0123 etc equal to one so
n equal to
2 raise to k now let us take log on both
sides and we will get log 2 raise to K to
base two equal to log n two base two that
is K into log two base two that this one
So we got k equal to log2base2
So if we need to search an element in a
BST So the time complexity is log n and here
we had eight elements so n equal to eight which
is equal to 2 raise to 3
So K equal to log two raise to 3 to base
two that is three into log2base2 which
is three into one equal to three
Now consider array we have eight elements so in worst case
eight iterations are needed and same thing happens for linked
list
Also eight iterations are needed for eight nodes but in
BST in same case it requires three iterations only and
this is why binary search tree is widely used for
searching and retrieval purposes.